This is also the first lesson of Dzogchen teaching as following the other great masters and
scholars.
First of all, Dzogci teaching. I think I mentioned it so many times, but first is the most
important to recognize one's own energy and nature.
That's the Garab Doge teaching, three world teachings. Recognize one's energy and nature of the
mind.
That is so, first so important to recognize or discover or identify one's own energy and nature.
One's energy and nature is not something different we go looking.
Looking of one's own energy and nature is our own mind, nature of one's own mind.
First, discover our own energy and nature of the mind or first identify our own energy and nature
of the mind.
Or seeing our own natural mind. Those are the vocabulary or the terminology I'm using.
No matter whatever I use, try to discover, see one's own natural mind. So that is what really
nature of the mind.
How that nature of the mind is, I'm sure you read many books, you heard so many times, I also
mentioned many times.
To the mind, to this mind, mind. Other day I also mentioned to you, look to your mind or we have to
talk something, look to your mind.
So this is not something crazy and something colorful and something my heart share to that. It's
simple, looking to our mind.
Look to your mind. In the teaching I also said, look to the lookers.
When you look to the lookers, all the time we look outside.
And also in the teaching I said, look to your mind, we're trying to look somewhere else.
I'm thinking to something. Because our happiness is so strong, we like to look something else.
And also sometimes when we say, look to your mind, maybe we think, what he is talking about, what
would I say, look to your mind.
Mind. We are really kind of like had those thoughts. But this time, say, look to your mind.
And what the grand master said, there's hundreds of things to see, but someone who saw your one's
own mind is hero.
Hero is. Hero in heroics. Who sees one's own mind is the warriors. Warriors.
So this is the first of all, you have to know that, see that.
Find out. And what then teaching said?
Also, Sarai said, I said that quotation quite a few times.
Great Master Sarai. Sarai is one of the great masters, great enlightened beings, masters of India.
Always everyone said that. He was. And he said, noble son and noble daughter, look to your mind.
So I mean, you are going to look to your mind.
When you look to your mind in that same teaching, there's nothing existing.
That means you're not going to see anything existing things.
And this is not existing. Then he continued. This unexistly mind, mind created so many things.
This mind created so many things. Why did that so many things?
Good, bad, yes, no, existent, non existent, this and that. All that created by this no mind exist
ent.
When you look to this mind, it is unbound. There's nothing you see.
That itself is saying in the Buddha teaching, it's Dharmakaya, unbound.
This is again what the Tara said. When you look to that, this is not his story,
not the making story of the other side of the mountains. It's really looking to our own mind.
To find out that, when you discover that, you see the true nature exactly as it is.
This is also another teaching by very famous, I mean, many of you know, you heard, and I heard too,
and we all heard that.
Very famous teacher known Atisha. Atisha came around 11 centuries.
He was a great, great, great, great, great son of the Shandarakshis' family.
Great master Shandarakshis who came to Tibet, 8th century, become the founder of the great Buddha,
founder of the Buddhism.
He is like, I mean, he was a mom, he was an old man, but his brother must continue that in the
later generation, 11th century, around 10th century, Atisha was born.
And Atisha came to Tibet around 11th century, you know, better days.
This is a very famous history. And he has so many students.
Among the one of the foremost disciples of Atisha is called Drongtongma.
Drongtongma is an attendant and disciple and the principal lineage holder of Atisha in Tibet.
Tibet, Tibet, Tibet. And in his teaching, this teaching, that Atisha and Drongtongma, they have a
dialogue about the nature of the mind, the nature of the mind.
And then, Atisha, Drongtongma said to Atisha, the teacher or the Lord, I looked, I'm making a
little commentary too.
And the teacher, I looked many times, but I did not see anything. That's what Drongtongma said to
Atisha.
And Atisha said, Drongtongma, he called Drongtongma, you saw that exactly as it is, exactly as it
is, again and again.
And what Drongtongma said, of course, what he asked, I did not see, I looked again and again, again
and again, I did not see anything.
And Drongtongma, Atisha said, and Drongtongma, you looked, you saw that exactly as it is, again and
again, exactly as it is, again and again.
Then, Drongtongma, he said to Atisha, Lord or great teacher, then I should just rest in that, that
not finding state, not finding, I should rest in that, not seeing any, not, I should rest unseen
state.
And then Atisha answered, I said, and Drongtongma, rest, rest, rest, relax in that state, rest in
the relaxed in that state.
That tells, when you look to the old nature of the mind, there's nothing to carnival see.
When we don't see the carnival state, there's nothing further to look than that.
That is absolute nature.
So one this in the teaching said, in the Dokti teaching, the great Master said, first to recognize
that in it is natural, exactly as it is, you identify, that is so important.
And that is what it's called, in the generally called the vu.
Now you discover the vu. V-E-I, that is the vu.
Now you have to maintain, that is meditation.
Maintain is then continue meditating with good postures.
Post with good postures, with good, those all beautiful motivations, joy, appreciation and dev
otions.
And the modic that really all those instructions, you receive so many teachings, you know, and with
that, and then after that, then relax.
Realize exactly as Atisha said, relax and calmly, peacefully, and not any effort, not any activity,
not con forceful, relaxed.
With that, relax, but during that time, what apply?
The liberated techniques, applying the conduct, liberating conduct.
But that means, during the meditation, whatever the consumption of thought, the arising, instantly
liberated.
That means, don't hold that.
Don't go after those thoughts, liberated techniques.
So that means that you have the vu of the unborn true nature.
Behold exactly as it is, unborn nature.
And then you maintain that really, with that instruction, you receive the teachings, or in unm
ovable kind of those, monkey-like, ocean-like, and as well as it is.
Those poor, abiding techniques, I think many of you know that, but basically, to relaxing natural
state as it is.
And during the meditation, conduct is liberating.
And all thought and consumption during the meditation will come up, that don't hold, don't analyze,
and let it go.
Let immediately release.
And continually maintain that, that during the meditation, and ever you can maintain that also,
even in the post-meditation, as much as you can.
Particularly, applying the liberated techniques, sub-liberated techniques in the post-meditated
status, and then do the dedicating merits, merits, all your virtues.
What a good reason, what a good purpose. A powerful sentence means that it is strongly in the heart
and the mind, in reaching good things to every living means.
And then, follow in the exact instructions of the teaching of the Ganesha teacher, Buddha Shakyam
uni, and Gaurabhema, some of their teachings, and practice it as much as you can do that way.
And that is known as practicing the Dokki teaching and practicing Dharma.
So that is my brilliant talk today.
Thank you very much everyone. Thank you.
So that's it. Yeah, we stop here. Thank you.
And now we do short practices as we've been doing.